Transaction Availability and Impact of Failures (#16073)
yugabyte/yugabyte-db: docs/content/preview/architecture/transactions/distributed-txns.md

- Commit hybrid timestamp: This timestamp is chosen as the current hybrid time at the transaction status tablet at the moment of appending the transaction committed entry to its Raft log. It is then used as the final MVCC timestamp for regular records that replace the transaction's provisional records when provisional records are being applied and cleaned up.
- List of IDs of participating tablets: After a transaction commits, the final set of tablets to which the transaction has written is known. The tablet server managing the transaction sends this list to the transaction status tablet as part of the commit message, and the transaction status tablet makes sure that all participating tablets are notified of the transaction's committed status. This process might take multiple retries, and the transaction record can only be cleaned up after this is done.

## Impact of Failures

> The Provisional Records are written to all the replicas of the tablets responsible for the keys being modified in a transaction. When a node with the tablet that has received the provisional records or is about to receive the provisional records fails, a new leader is elected for the tablet within a few seconds(`~2s`) as described in [Leader Failure](../../core-functions/high-availability/#tablet-peer-leader-failure). The transaction simply proceeds further with the newly elected leader. In this case, the time taken for the transaction to complete increases by the time taken for the leader election.

Author: I've mentioned query layer will wait & retry . But intentionally leaving out  the term `rpc`

> The transaction manager (typically, the node the client is connected to) maintains the transaction-id to client mapping and sends heartbeats to the tablets containing the provisional records of the transaction. When the manager fails, the heartbeats stop and the provisional records remain uncommitted in the respective tablets.  Provisional records that do not get heartbeats become stale after certain time. Clients connected to the failed coordinator will receive an error message: 

Reviewer: what is the transaction-id -> client mapping referring to? which clients?

Reviewer: why would the manager fail? what does that mean?

Author: For the purpose of this page and other Availability pages, `fail` means, the node is unreachable either because of a crash or network failure.

The txn-id that points to the current txn in that connection. I was told that even though the txn-id is present in the status tablet and in the provisional records, the client will not be able to continue to the txn via connecting to another node as it would not know the txn-id.

```output.sql
FATAL:  57P01: terminating connection due to unexpected postmaster exit
FATAL:  XX000: Network error: recvmsg error: Connection refused
```

> As the client is unaware of the transaction-id and the client to transaction-id mapping cannot be regenerated, it would be the responsibility of the client to retry the transaction. Other clients with transactions that were waiting on the transactions handled by the failed coordinator, will have to wait for the transaction's provisional records and locks to expire and then proceed normally.

Reviewer: we should note that when a coordinator does not receive a heartbeat from the client driving a transaction, it automatically cancels that transaction, so those provisional records woudl no longer block conflicting/competing transactions on the same keys

Author: done..

- Commit hybrid timestamp: This timestamp is chosen as the current hybrid time at the transaction status tablet at the moment of appending the transaction committed entry to its Raft log. It is then used as the final MVCC timestamp for regular records that replace the transaction's provisional records when provisional records are being applied and cleaned up.
- List of IDs of participating tablets: After a transaction commits, the final set of tablets to which the transaction has written is known. The tablet server managing the transaction sends this list to the transaction status tablet as part of the commit message, and the transaction status tablet makes sure that all participating tablets are notified of the transaction's committed status. This process might take multiple retries, and the transaction record can only be cleaned up after this is done.

## Impact of Failures

> The Provisional Records are written to all the replicas of the tablets responsible for the keys being modified in a transaction. When a node with the tablet that has received the provisional records or is about to receive the provisional records fails, a new leader is elected for the tablet within a few seconds(`~2s`) as described in [Leader Failure](../../core-functions/high-availability/#tablet-peer-leader-failure). The transaction simply proceeds further with the newly elected leader. In this case, the time taken for the transaction to complete increases by the time taken for the leader election.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Provisional records are written to all the replicas of the tablets responsible for the keys being modified in a transaction. When a node with the tablet that has received the provisional records or is about to receive the provisional records fails, a new leader is elected for the tablet within a few seconds(`~2s`) as described in [Leader Failure](../../core-functions/high-availability/#tablet-peer-leader-failure). The transaction simply proceeds further with the newly elected leader. In this case, the time taken for the transaction to complete increases by the time taken for the leader election.
```

Author: Accepted the changes

> When the transaction manager (typically, the node the client is connected to) does not receive a heartbeat from the client, it automatically cancels that transaction, so those provisional records would no longer block conflicting transactions waiting on the same keys. The transaction manager also maintains the transaction-id to client mapping and sends heartbeats to the transaction status tablet containing the information about the the transaction. When the manager fails, the heartbeats stop and the provisional records remain uncommitted in the respective tablets. Transactions that do not get heartbeats at the transaction status tablet become stale after certain time. Clients connected to the failed manager will receive an error message: 

Reviewer: in this case i think its actually the coordinator who cancels the transaction if it doesn't receive a heartbeat from the pg client

> The transaction manager also maintains the transaction-id to client mapping and sends heartbeats to the transaction status tablet containing the information about the the transaction

i'm not sure what this sentence is trying to say, can you rephrase?

> When the manager fails, the heartbeats stop and the provisional records remain uncommitted in the respective tablets.

why would the manager fail? give an example

> Transactions that do not get heartbeats at the transaction status tablet become stale after certain time.

this is the same case as above, so maybe note that. also "stale after certain time" is imprecise -- we can explain how that happens in terms of these flags: https://github.com/yugabyte/yugabyte-db/blob/master/src/yb/tablet/transaction_coordinator.cc#L74

Author: Explained offline and Made appropriate changes.

```output.sql
FATAL:  57P01: terminating connection due to unexpected postmaster exit
FATAL:  XX000: Network error: recvmsg error: Connection refused
```

> As the client is unaware of the transaction-id and the client to transaction-id mapping cannot be regenerated, it would be the responsibility of the client to retry the transaction. Other clients with transactions that were waiting on the transactions handled by the failed manager, will have to wait for the transaction's provisional records and locks to expire and then proceed normally.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As the client is unaware of the transaction-id, and since the client to transaction-id mapping cannot be regenerated, it would be the responsibility of the client to retry the transaction. Other clients with transactions that were blocked on provisional records written by the failed manager will have to wait for the transaction to be expired due to heartbeat timeout and can then proceed normally.
```

Reviewer: i posted this suggestion, but im not clear on a few things:
1. what is the client to transaction-id mapping you're referring to?
2. what do you mean when you say the client should retry the transaction? do you mean start a new transaction and try the same operations? if so, be more precise about that, because "retry the transaction" sounds like it may refer to trying to revive the already-failed transaction somehow

Author: Made the appropriate changes.
